All right.
So hopefully you're already enjoying the simple and straightforward syntax of Python.
I'm actually going to start this video on if statements with a challenge and that is that can you work
out the Python syntax for an IF statement from the syntax for a follow up.
It's pretty similar.
See if you can figure it out.
OK.
Did you manage it.
Well then if say I'm going to put back in name is equal to drop and then the if statement is very simply
if and then name and then double equals as were used to equal to rob.
This is testing whether name is equal to rob.
Rather than setting name equal to rub and then we can to use the colon just like we did in the follow
up and then
we'll do whatever we want to do.
If that statement is true afterwards so simple as that.
Let's have a look.
I rub.
And just to check make sure it's working correctly.
We change that to roll but it doesn't do anything.
So that's how IF statements work super straightforward and easy to read to put an else clause in then
we just return back to the edge of our code so we can remove any indenting and then we have an ELSE
command.
And another colon and then we'll print something like.
I don't know you.
So now we've got Hello Rob or
the name is Keston.
I don't know you and we can also add extra statements here and just put in the syntax and or so we could
have name is equal to say
cast in their and then allow just a general name.
So then rob or Keston would be allowed in.
Anyone else would not.
OK.
So that's pretty much all there is to if statements.
I'm now going to give you a slightly meta programming challenge than the one you had in the previous
video.
This is one of my favorite programming challenges.
It's not too tricky but it definitely gets you thinking.
And that is you need to create a program which displays the first 50 prime numbers.
Now if you're not sure what a prime number is essentially it's a number that has precisely two factors
or 2 numbers that go into it and those two factors have to be one and itself.
So for example 2 is a prime number because the only numbers that go into two are 1 and 2 but six is
not a prime number.
Because two and three also get into six.
So I'll tell you what the first few prime numbers are.
They are two three four is not because two guys into it 5 7 11 is the next one etc..
So you can look that up if you want to clarify that definition a little bit but hopefully that gives
you a clear idea.
And we want to have a loop which is going to have a few If statements in it which sets it up in any
way you like to display the first 50 prime numbers.
Off you go then.
Best of luck
OK.
Well I'm going to start with a WHILE loop so I'm going to start with a variable called number of primes
to count the number of primes that we have.
And I'm going to set that initially to 0 8 and we're going to keep going as long as the number of primes
is less than 50.
And then once we get to 50 we'll stop.
And then within this wild ape I'm going to start at the first prime number.
So that is two and then I'm going to increase by one each time and then check to see whether that number
has any factors other than 1 or itself.
And if it does it's not a prime number so I won't display it and if it doesn't it is a prime number.
So I will say see how that's going to work.
That's half of our number which at the beginning of the program will set to two.
So now I'm going to do a follow up and I'll call this I and we'll loop through a range starting at 2
opti number.
So we're starting at the number two and then let's say we're doing the number 10 we're going to go to
three four five six seven eight nine.
I remember this range doesn't actually include number which is just right for us because we don't want
to check if the number divides itself because every number divides itself.
So that's our second leap.
And then we want to check if a number divides another number.
We actually saw how to do that in Javascript in the age Tim L5 section and the syntax for doing it in
Python is exactly the same.
So it's just if.
And then to get the remainder.
When number is divided by we use number and then percent I.
And if I divide exactly into number then the remainder is going to be zero.
So if this has happened that means the number is not prime because a number must go into it.
Exactly.
So I'm going to deal with that by having a variable called is prime which is initially true.
So I'll assume that every number is prime until I find another member that goes into it.
So once I found another number that goes into it then his prime becomes Foldes So then we want to end
the if statement so we get back 1.
We also want to.
And the for loop but we want to stay in the major while loop.
So then at this point we're going to check to see if is prime is equal to true and if it is we want
to do two things.
So we want to print the number
and we want to add 1 to the number of primes that we have.
We can do that using plus equals 1.
If it's not prime We don't want to do anything.
But either way we want to add 1 to number so that we can then go on and test the next number.
And just before we run that there is one change I need to make and that is that in Python.
True and False begin with capital letters.
So we should always use capital-T in capital F for true and false.
And there we can.
So those are where they look very much like the first 50 prime numbers.
So to get through that fairly quickly just to go through once again what's going on here.
We're setting the number of primes that we've got to zero and we're setting the number that we're testing
at any given time.
To start off at two because we know that that's the first prime number.
And then we're keeping going as long as the number of primes is less than 50.
So it will stop when we get to 50 and initially we're assuming that the number that we're testing is
prime because we're setting is prime to be true.
And then we're taking I in a loop from 2 up to the number that we're testing and we're checking to see
if I divide number.
Exactly.
And if it does then we'll set is prime to falls.
So if number was 10 for example then we would go to 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 and divide each of those into ten
and see if any went exactly of course for 10 2 and 5.
Exactly.
So which set is prime to be false.
And then at the very end once we'd done all that testing we checked to see if Prime is true.
Then we print the number out and we add 1 to the number of primes that we've got.
Then regardless of what we do we then add 1 to the testing number and then we just keep going until
we get our 50 primes.
So looking at that we're doing something pretty complex there but it's a really simple and really brief
chunk of code that does all that for us.
There's no curly brackets and even very few parentheses in the next video.
I'll show you the last piece of the Python puzzle before we make our Python mastermind game.
And that is functions.